0.12.8
======

Bokeh Version ``0.12.8`` is an incremental update that adds a few important
features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights include:


 Many other small bugfixes and docs additions. For full details see the
 :bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

Migration Guide
---------------

NOTE: the 0.12.x series is the last planned release series before a version
1.0 release. For more information see the `project roadmap`_.

Deprecated ``bokeh.charts`` support removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``bokeh.charts`` module, which was simply a compatibility shim to load the
separate ``bkcharts` package, has been removed. Additionlaly, Bokeh itself no
longer lists ``bkcharts`` as a dependency. In order to continue using
``bkcharts`` code, the ``bkcharts`` package must be installed separately.

MPL compatibility removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``bokeh.mpl`` module and all supporting code in ``bokeh.core.compat`` has
been removed. Bokeh no longer offers or attempts any automatic MPL conversion.

Table Date Formatter Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A regression in ``0.12.7`` caused the ``DateFormatter`` to stop functioning.
The problem has been fixed, however instead of the previously accepted JQuery
style formats, the``format`` property now only accepts

* standard `strftime`_ format strings (making it consistent with
  ``DatetimeTickFormatter``)
* any of the following additional predefined formats names:

  ================================================ ================== ===================
  Format name(s)                                   Format string      Example Output
  ================================================ ================== ===================
  ``ATOM`` / ``W3C`` / ``RFC-3339`` / ``ISO-8601`` ``"%Y-%m-%d"``     2014-03-01
  ``COOKIE``                                       ``"%a, %d %b %Y"`` Sat, 01 Mar 2014
  ``RFC-850``                                      ``"%A, %d-%b-%y"`` Saturday, 01-Mar-14
  ``RFC-1123`` / ``RFC-2822``                      ``"%a, %e %b %Y"`` Sat, 1 Mar 2014
  ``RSS`` / ``RFC-822`` / ``RFC-1036``             ``"%a, %e %b %y"`` Sat, 1 Mar 14
  ``TIMESTAMP``                                    (ms since epoch)   1393632000000
  ================================================ ================== ===================

  Note that the previously available format name ``TICKS`` is no longer
  supported.

End of support for Python 3.4
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Starting with this release, Bokeh is no longer continuously tested against
Python 3.4. Use of Bokeh with Python 3.4 will very likely still work, but
there are no longer any guarantees backed by CI testing.

.. _project roadmap: https://bokehplots.com/pages/roadmap.html
.. _strftime: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/strftime.3.html
