.. _release-0-12-9:

0.12.9
======

Bokeh Version ``0.12.9`` (Sep 2017) is an incremental update that adds a few
important features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights include:

* JupyterLab integration with the `jupyterlab_bokeh`_ extension
* Efficient binary transport for sending arrays to clients
* Improvements to new Graph/Network capability

Many other small bugfixes and docs additions. For full details see the
:bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

.. _release-0-12-9-migration:

`Migration Guide <releases.html#release-0-12-9-migration>`__
------------------------------------------------------------

Deprecated ``bokeh.charts`` support removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``bokeh.charts`` module, which was simply a compatibility shim to load the
separate ``bkcharts`` package, has been removed. Additionally, Bokeh itself no
longer lists ``bkcharts`` as a dependency. In order to continue using
``bkcharts`` code, the ``bkcharts`` package must be installed separately.

Deprecated MPL compatibility removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``bokeh.mpl`` module and all supporting code in ``bokeh.core.compat`` has
been removed. Bokeh no longer offers or attempts any automatic MPL conversion.

Table Date Formatter Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A regression in ``0.12.7`` caused the ``DateFormatter`` to stop functioning.
The problem has been fixed, however instead of the previously accepted JQuery
style formats, the``format`` property now only accepts

* standard `strftime`_ format strings (making it consistent with
  ``DatetimeTickFormatter``)
* any of the following additional predefined formats names:

  ================================================ ================== ===================
  Format name(s)                                   Format string      Example Output
  ================================================ ================== ===================
  ``ATOM`` / ``W3C`` / ``RFC-3339`` / ``ISO-8601`` ``"%Y-%m-%d"``     2014-03-01
  ``COOKIE``                                       ``"%a, %d %b %Y"`` Sat, 01 Mar 2014
  ``RFC-850``                                      ``"%A, %d-%b-%y"`` Saturday, 01-Mar-14
  ``RFC-1123`` / ``RFC-2822``                      ``"%a, %e %b %Y"`` Sat, 1 Mar 2014
  ``RSS`` / ``RFC-822`` / ``RFC-1036``             ``"%a, %e %b %y"`` Sat, 1 Mar 14
  ``TIMESTAMP``                                    (ms since epoch)   1393632000000
  ================================================ ================== ===================

  Note that the previously available format name ``TICKS`` is no longer
  supported.

Old Testing Functions Removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The functions ``bokeh.test`` and ``bokeh.util.testing.runtests`` have been
removed immediately. Tests should be run as described in the `testing section`_
of the Developer's Guide.

The function ``bokeh.util.testing.print_versions`` has been removed
immediately. The ``bokeh info`` command (or ``python -m bokeh info``) should be
used instead.

Refactor of ``bokeh.client`` and ``bokeh.document``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``bokeh.client`` and ``bokeh.document`` packages were refactored, to make
maintenance and testing simpler, and to improve overall code quality. No
commonly used or demonstrated public APIs were affected, (no example code
required any changes). The other files that were moved or changed are not
expected to impact user code.

End of Official Support for Python 3.4
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Starting with this release, Bokeh is no longer continuously tested against
Python 3.4. Use of Bokeh with Python 3.4 will very likely still work, but
there are no longer any guarantees backed by CI testing.

.. _jupyterlab_bokeh: https://github.com/bokeh/jupyterlab_bokeh
.. _project roadmap: https://bokeh.org/roadmap
.. _strftime: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/strftime.3.html
.. _testing section: http://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/dev_guide/testing.html
