0.12.0 (Jun 2016)
=================

Bokeh Version ``0.12.0`` is a large release with many new
improvements:

* Responsive layout and styling improvements throughout
* BokehJS plotting and charts APIs for pure JS dev
* Legends can be placed outside / next to the central plot area
* Expanded WebGL support to all markers, fixed webgl bugs
* New color palettes: Viridis, Magma, Inferno, and Plasma
* New model types:

  - Arrow, Title, and Label annotations
  - LogColorMapper for scaled color mapping
  - FuncTickFormatter for simpler custom ticking

* Support for computed transforms (e.g. Jitter) on data columns
* Documentation improvements:

  - re-done user gude sections for layout
  - new user guide sections for JS APIs
  - new user guide sections for custom extensions

* Server features:

  - unlocked callbacks for use with threads
  - "--num-threads" option for simpler deployment
  - new index landing page listing installed aps

* UX improvements

  - toolbar moved to the right, and made sticky, by default
  - left aligned title, closer in, by default
  - smaller, italic axes labels

* New hosted demos at https://demo.bokehplots.com
* Many small bug fixes

NOTE: the 0.12.x series is the last planned release series before a
version 1.0 release. The focus of the 1.0 release will be implementing
build automation to enforce API stability, and a very small number of
high value features.

Known Issues
------------

Currently the most reliable sizing modes for layouts are "fixed" and
"scale_width". Other modes may work, or may produce undesired effects.
Work on layout is still ongoing. Support for "mixes" sizing modes
will come in a future release. Additionally, the ``ResizeTool`` does
not function reliably with responsive layout, and will most likely
be deprecated in a future release.

Migration Guide
---------------

Google Maps
~~~~~~~~~~~

Google has made a change to their terms of use for google maps, and
"effective immediately", ALL google maps API calls MUST have an API key,
or they will not function:

    http://googlegeodevelopers.blogspot.mx/2016/06/building-for-scale-updates-to-google.html

All Bokeh ``GMapPlot`` models must have their ``api_key`` property set,
or they will not function properly. PLEASE NOTE: all previously created
GMap plots from *any* previous version of Bokeh are affect by this TOS
change.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

All WebGL examples have been moved under ``examples/webgl``. The
``timeout.py`` and ``random_tiles`` app examples have been removed
in favor of new, better examples. Several examples of new layout
capability are under ``examples/howto/layout``.

BokehJS
~~~~~~~

The mechanism for declaring properties on BokehJS has changed, with the
addition of the ``@define``, ``@override`` and ``@internal`` methods.
This may affect existing custom extesnions. Until now, BokehJS details
were considered an internal implementation detail. In the future, more
attention will be given to BokehJS stability.

Deprecations and Compatibility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new layout work was a large undertaking. As a result, there are many
deprecations, including `hplot`, `vplot`, etc. Almost all old functions
will continue to function, while issuing deprecation  warnings. However,
there are newer functions that should be preferred. The most up-to-date
guidance for layout going forward is at:

    http://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/docs/user_guide/layout.html

In most cases it was possible to move forward with a deprecation, for the
time being, but there are two small hard compatibility breaks that could
not be avoided:

``Plot.title``
''''''''''''''

This attribute is now a ``Title`` object. It is no longer possible to set, e.g.
``p.title = "some text"`` as a string value. Instead, you must do:

    p.title.text = "some_text"

It is still possible to pass the `title`` keyword argument a string value
to ``figure`` and Charts, as a convenience. Additionally all other title
related properties on ``Plot``, e.g ``title_text_color`` continue to work
for now, while issuing deprecation warnings.

``session.show``
''''''''''''''''

The ``ClientSession.show`` method must now be explicitly passed the thing to
be shown. It is no longer possible to call, e.g. ``session.show()`` without
a parameter. Instead, you must do:

    session.show(plot)
