0.12.5 (March 2017)
===================

Bokeh Version ``0.12.5`` is an incremental update that adds a few important
features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights include:

* New general capability for Python/JS events (:bokeh-issue:`3210`,
  :bokeh-issue:`3748`, :bokeh-issue:`5278`)
* Bokeh apps easily viewable inline in Jupyter Notebooks (:bokeh-issue:`3461`)
* Confusing ``--host`` parameter no longer necessary (:bokeh-issue:`5692`)
* Interactive legends can now control glyph visibility (:bokeh-issue:`2274`,
  :bokeh-issue:`3715`)
* Many fixes and improvements to ``GMapPlot`` including a new ``gmap``
  function for creating Google Maps plots easily (:bokeh-issue:`2822`,
  :bokeh-issue:`2940`, :bokeh-issue:`3737`, :bokeh-issue:`4835`,
  :bokeh-issue:`5592`, :bokeh-issue:`5826`, :bokeh-issue:`5845`)
* ``CustomJSTransform`` now available for CDS columns (:bokeh-issue:`5015`)
* Sophisticated "pivot" example app contributed (:bokeh-issue:`5894`)
* Themes now work with ``components`` and in Jupyter notebooks
  (:bokeh-issue:`4722`, :bokeh-issue:`4952`, )

Many other bugfixes and docs additions are also included. For full details
see the :bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

NOTE: the 0.12.x series is the last planned release series before a
version 1.0 release. The focus of the 1.0 release will be implementing
build automation to enforce API stability, and a very small number of
high value features. For more information see the `project roadmap`_.

Known Issues
------------

The ClientSession APIs defined in `bokeh.client.session`, such as
`push_session`, don't currently support the new `on_event` interface for
UI event callbacks in Bokeh Server application. You may track the issue on
GitHub (:bokeh-issue:`6092`).

Migration Guide
---------------

As the project approaches a 1.0 release, it is necessary to make some changes
to bring interfaces and functionality up to a point that can be maintained
long-term. We try to limit such changes as much as possible, and have a
period of deprecation.

New Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**MPL COMPATIBLITY IS DEPRECATED**

Bokeh's MPL compatibility was implemented using a third-party library that
only exposes a small fraction of all Matplotlib functionality, and is
now no longer being actively maintained. The Bokeh team unfortunately does
not have the resources to continue supporting this functionality, which
was never more than *extremely* limited in capability, and often produced
substandard results. Accordingly, in order to support the long term health
of the project, it has been decided to remove all MPL compatibility support
on the occasion of a 1.0 release. Any code that currently uses ``to_bokeh``
will continue to work with a deprecation warning until that time.

The ``bokeh.embed.standalone_html_page_for_models`` method has been deprecated
in place of ``bokeh.embed.file_html``. For details see :bokeh-pull:`5978`.

The ``validate`` keyword argument to ``bokeh.io.save`` has been deprecated.
Future usage of ``bokeh.io.save`` will always validate the document before
outputting a file.

Deprecations removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All previous deprecations up to ``0.12.0`` have be removed. Below is the
complete list of removals.

Modules and functions and classes that have been removed:

============================ ========================== ===================================
Functions Removed            Modules Removed            Classes Removed
============================ ========================== ===================================
``bokeh.embed.components``   ``bokeh.browserlib``       ``bokeh.core.properties.TitleProp``
``bokeh.charts.hplot``       ``bokeh.mixins``           ``bokeh.models.layouts.GridPlot``
``bokeh.charts.vplot``       ``bokeh.plotting_helpers`` ``bokeh.models.layouts.VBoxForm``
``bokeh.io.hplot``           ``bokeh.properties``
``bokeh.io.vplot``           ``bokeh.templates``
``bokeh.io.vform``
``bokeh.plotting.hplot``
``bokeh.plotting.vplot``
============================ ========================== ===================================

The methods ``bokeh.document.add`` and ``push_notebook`` of
``ColumnDataSource`` have been removed.

The ``bokeh.io.output_server`` function has been also been removed.
Additionally, ``bokeh.io.push`` and other supporting functions or
properties that are useless without ``output_server`` have been
removed. This includes any transitive imports of these functions
from other modules.

Additionally, the property ``bokeh.charts.builder.Builder.sort_legend`` was
removed, as well as the following properties of ``Plot``

* ``border_fill``
* ``background_fill``
* ``logo``
* ``responsive``
* ``title_text_align``
* ``title_text_alpha``
* ``title_text_baseline``
* ``title_text_color``
* ``title_text_font``
* ``title_text_font_size``

Host Parameter Obsoleted
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The ``--host`` parameter is now unnecessary. For compatibility, supplying
it will currently cause a warning to be displayed, but it will otherwise
be ignored, and apps will run as normal. In a future release, supplying it
will result in an error.

The ``--host`` parameter for the Bokeh server was confusing and difficult to
explain. As long as the Bokeh server relied on the HTTP "host" header to
provide URLs to resources, the ``--host`` parameter was a necessary precaution
against certain kinds of HTTP spoofing attacks. However, the Bokeh server
has been updated to no longer require the use of the "host" header (and this
is maintained under test). Accordingly, there is no need to have any check
on the value of the "host" header, and so ``--host`` is no longer needed.

Document and Model Refactoring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order that ``document.py`` and ``models.py`` only contain things that might
be of usual interest to users, some changes and rearrangements were made.

The ``abstract`` class decorator was moved from ``models.py`` to
``has_props.py``. The class decorator now also adds an admonition to the
docstring of any class marked abstract that it is not useful to instantiate
directly.

The metaclass ``Viewable`` has been renamed to ``MetaModel``.

The ``document.py`` module has been split up, and parts that would not be of
normal interest to most users have been moved to better locations.

These changes are not expected to impact user code in any way. For complete
details see :bokeh-pull:`5786`.

JQuery and underscore.js removed from BokehJS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

JQuery has been removed as a build dependency of BokehJS. The variable
`Bokeh.$` is no longer available. If you require JQuery (i.e. for a custom
extension or when using the JavaScript API) you will need to provide it
explicitly.

underscore.js has been removed as a build dependency of BokehJS. The variable
`Bokeh._` is no longer available. If you require underscore.js (i.e. for a
custom extension or when using the JavaScript API) you will need to provide it
explicitly.

Both of these removals together result in a ~10% reduction in the size of
the minified BokehJS library.

Default tooltip position for lines changed to nearest point
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When showing tooltips for lines, the new default is to label the nearest point,
instead of the previous point, which used to be the default.

HTTP Request information for apps limited to query arguments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``request`` previously attribute was added to session contexts as a way to
expose HTTP query parameters. It was discovered that providing the entire
request is not compatible with the usage of ``--num-procs``. A method was
found to satisfy the original feature request for query arguments, together
with ``--num-procs`` (but *only* for query arguments). Accordingly the only
attribute that can now be accessed on ``request`` is ``.arguments``, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    curdoc().session_context.request.arguments

Attempting to access any other attribute on ``request`` will result in an
error.

.. _project roadmap: http://bokehplots.com/pages/roadmap.html

Default save file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If user-specified or default destination cannot be written to, a temporary
file is generated instead. This mostly affects using ``output_file`` in an
interactive session which formerly could result in a ``PermissionError``.
For details see :bokeh-pull:`5942`.

The ``bokeh.io.save`` method will now only accept a ``LayoutDOM`` object and
no longer a ``Document`` object for its ``obj`` argument. This aligns the
``bokeh.io.save`` argument types with ``bokeh.io.show``.

Reorganization of bokeh's examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Low-level examples, located under ``examples/models``, were split into ``file``
and ``server`` examples and are available under ``examples/models/file`` and
``examples/models/server`` respectively (similarly to plotting examples).

Enabling WebGL via URL parameters disallowed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously it was possible to enable WebGL with ``?webgl=1`` URL parameter.
With addition of a separate ``bokeh-gl`` bundle, this usage is no longer
supportable. WebGL rendering is still configurable using the ``Plot.webgl``
property.
