0.12.14 (Dec 2017)
==================

Bokeh Version ``0.12.14`` is an incremental update that adds a few
important features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights
include:


Many other small bugfixes and docs additions. For full details see the
:bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

Migration Guide
---------------

NOTE: the 0.12.x series is the last planned release series before a version
1.0 release. For more information see the `project roadmap`_.

Mapping of Unknown Catgorical Factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously, data (e.g in a CDS column) referring to a categorical factor that
did not exist in the relevant ``FactorRange``, would cause an error in the
browser. Now, any such attempted mappings will silently return ``NaN``. Any
data points with these factors as coordinates will not render.

The practical motivation for this change is that updating a ``FactorRange``
to have a new set of factors could result in an inconsistency triggering the
error condition, causing plots to fail to render. With this change, the use-case
of updating factor ranges should work more smoothly, however there will be no
immediate indication of problems in case "bad" factors are included accidentally
in data other than the data points not being rendered.

MercatorTileSource change
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`MercatorTileSource` models previously snapped to the closest zoom
level resulting in user supplied axis ranges to be largely
ignored. The default behavior has now been changed from snapping to
the closest zoom level to simply maintaining the correct aspect ratio,
while keeping the user defined bounds contained within the axis
ranges.

The old behavior may be restored by setting enabling the `snap_to_zoom`
property.

.. _project roadmap: https://bokehplots.com/pages/roadmap.html
