0.12.6 (Jun 2017)
=================

Bokeh Version ``0.12.6`` is an incremental update that adds a few important
features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights include:

* Headless, programmatic export of SVG and PNG images (:bokeh-issue:`538`)
* New annotations ``Band`` and ``Whisker`` for displaying error estimates
  (:bokeh-issue:`2352`)
* Fine-grained sub-element patching for images and other "multi" glyphs
  (:bokeh-issue:`6285`)
* Hover hit-testing extended to segments and all markers (:bokeh-issue:`5907`,
  :bokeh-issue:`5907`)
* Fixes for sorting and selecting from DataTables (:bokeh-issue:`3564`,
  :bokeh-issue:`6115`)
* Large cleanup and refactor of the layout system (:bokeh-issue:`4764`,
  :bokeh-issue:`4810`, :bokeh-issue:`5131`, :bokeh-issue:`5518`,
  :bokeh-issue:`6213`, :bokeh-issue:`6287`)
* Improved formatting options for hover tool fields and axis tick labels
  (:bokeh-issue:`1239`, :bokeh-issue:`1671`, :bokeh-issue:`2595`,
  :bokeh-issue:`6079`)

Many other bugfixes and docs additions are also included. For full details
see the :bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

NOTE: the 0.12.x series is the last planned release series before a
version 1.0 release. The focus of the 1.0 release will be implementing
build automation to enforce API stability, and a very small number of
high value features. For more information see the `project roadmap`_.

Migration Guide
---------------

As the project approaches a 1.0 release, it is necessary to make some changes
to bring interfaces and functionality up to a point that can be maintained
long-term. We try to limit such changes as much as possible, and have a
period of deprecation.

New deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``Plot.webgl`` property has been deprecated in place of a new property
``Plot.output_backend`` in order to avoid conflicts between WebGL and a new
SVG backend. If you are using ``plot.webgl = True``, you should switch to
setting ``plot.output_backend = "webgl"`` for the future.

Old deprecations removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All previous deprecations up to ``0.12.3`` have be removed. Below is the
complete list of removals.

* Deprecated ``Button.type`` property has been removed.
* Deprecated ``Legend`` properties: ``legends``, ``legend_margin``,
  ``legend_padding``, ``legend_spacing`` have been removed.
* Deprecated ``DatetimeTickFormatter.formats`` property has been removed.
* ``Tool`` dimensions may not only be specified with enum values.

New models for Scales
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following BokehJS classes have been moved and renamed:

============================== ==============================
Old                            New
============================== ==============================
``mappers/LinearMapper``       ``scales/LinearScale``
``mappers/LogMapper``          ``scales/LogScale``
``mappers/CategoricalMapper``  ``scales/CategoricalScale``
============================== ==============================

Previously, these Mapper classes were internal implementation details.
The new Scale classes are first-class Bokeh models and are accessible from
Python. This was done to facilitate future work supporting custom,
user-defined scales.

There is a new Plot validation check to ensure that Scales and Ranges on a
dimension are compatible. By default, ``Plot`` models are configured with
``LinearScale`` models which (along with ``LogScale`` models) are compatible
with ``Range1d`` and ``DataRange1d`` range models.

One inevitable breaking change is that users employing a ``FactorRange`` in
the ``bokeh.model`` API will have to specify a ``CategoricalScale`` on the same
dimension. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    plot = Plot()
    plot.x_range = DataRange1d()
    plot.y_range = FactorRange(["Mon", "Tues", "Wed", "Thurs", "Fri"])
    plot.y_scale = CategoricalScale()

The ``bokeh.plotting.figure`` function should this range and scale
compatibility handling automagically in most cases.

As part of this work, some BokehJS attributes were renamed to be consistent
with the new terminology:

============================== ==============================
Old                            New
============================== ==============================
``CartesianFrame.x_mappers``   ``CartesianFrame.xscales``
``CartesianFrame.y_mappers``   ``CartesianFrame.yscales``
``GlyphRenderer.xmapper``      ``GlyphRenderer.xscale``
``GlyphRenderer.ymapper``      ``GlyphRenderer.yscale``
============================== ==============================

Since these attributes may be present in user code (e.g CustomJS callbacks
or extensions), the old names will continue to work for some time, with a
deprecation warning in the JS console.

New signaling API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously BokehJS used Backbone events for communication between models.
As part of an ongoing migration to TypeScript, the Backbone dependency was
removed, and the relevant portion replaces with a minimal, type-safe API
for signaling.

This change primarily affects contributors working on BokehJS and writers of
extensions.

===================================== ==============================================
Old                                   New
===================================== ==============================================
``@listenTo(obj, 'change', fn)``      ``@connect(obj.change, fn)``
``@listenTo(obj, 'change:attr', fn)`` ``@connect(obj.properties.attr.change, fn)``
``obj.trigger('change', arg)``        ``obj.change.emit(arg)``
``obj.trigger('change:attr', arg)``   ``obj.properties.attr.change.emit(arg)``
===================================== ==============================================

Python Datetime handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bokeh has not handled Python datetime values consistently with NumPy
``datetime64``. Bokeh aims to treat all datetime values "as-is", but in some
cases a local timezone conversion could affect Python datetime values. This
has been corrected. In case there is code that depends on the erroneous
behavior, please note that the new behavior is effective immediately and is
now maintained under test to be consistent with NumPy values. See the issue
:bokeh-issue:`5499` for more details.

Layout API and behaviour changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Layout was previously handled on document level and there was one solver per
document. This was changed to one solver per root, so document isn't anymore
responsible for any layout related stuff. All logic and APIs were moved to
views, specifically to ``LayoutDOM``. For example, if your code relied on
``document.resize(width, height)``, then you should use ``view.resize(width, height)``,
where ``view`` is an associated view of any of ``document``'s root models.
Views can be obtained through ``Bokeh.index``. To resize all roots use

.. code-block:: javascript

    for (var key in Bokeh.index) {
        Bokeh.index[key].resize(width, height);
    }

.. _project roadmap: http://bokehplots.com/pages/roadmap.html
