.. _release-2-4-0:

2.4.0
=====

Bokeh Version ``2.4.0`` (September 2021) is a new minor-release level that
brings many updates. Some of the new feature work includes:

First support for LaTeX- and MathML-based Mathtext (axis labels, tick labels,
and Divs) over the course of several PRs: :bokeh-issue:`11466`,
:bokeh-issue:`11525`, :bokeh-issue:`11584`,  :bokeh-issue:`11585`. Look for
upcoming releases to extend support to titles, legends, and labels.

Other work in this cycle includes:

* Docs fixes and improvements
    - Contributor's guide refreshed :bokeh-issue:`11513`
    - ``pre-commit`` hooks added :bokeh-issue:`11442`
    - Reference guide improvements  :bokeh-issue:`9961`, :bokeh-issue:`11445`, :bokeh-issue:`11563`
    - Sampledata and gallery example data added :bokeh-issue:`9329`, :bokeh-issue:`11489`

* WebGL fixes and improvements
    - WebGL backend rewritten using ReGL :bokeh-issue:`10861`
    - Dashed line styles fixed :bokeh-issue:`10876`
    - Hatch patterns supported :bokeh-issue:`11159`
    - Markers and rects re-use buffers efficiently :bokeh-issue:`11343`
    - Implemented all marker types :bokeh-issue:`11098`

* SVG fixes and improvements
    - Fix line dash offset and hatch patterns :bokeh-issue:`11058`
    - Missing ellipse glyph added :bokeh-issue:`11404`
    - Clipping area problem fixed :bokeh-issue:`11551`

* Misc fixes and improvements
    - Labels can now be multi-line :bokeh-issue:`7317`
    - Individual legend items and table columns can be hidden :bokeh-issue:`9261`, :bokeh-issue:`11423`
    - Tab panels can be set to disabled :bokeh-issue:`10898`
    - Toolbar buttons respect tab ordering :bokeh-issue:`11266`
    - Radio button groups support vertical orientation :bokeh-issue:`11374`
    - New consolidated RangesUpdate event :bokeh-issue:`11095`
    - Output from json_items includes Bokeh version :bokeh-issue:`11146`

And several other bug fixes and docs additions. For full details, see the
:bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

.. _release-2-4-0-migration:

`Migration Guide <releases.html#release-2-4-0-migration>`__
-----------------------------------------------------------

Minimum Package Versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release raises the minimum version for some packages

* Bokeh now requires Python 3.7 or higher.

Runtime dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bokeh no longer requires the package ``python-dateutil``.

Bokeh can optionally use the package ``xyzservices`` for managing tile
source metadata.

Wikimedia Tile Provider
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Wikimedia has restricted their tile service to only function with Wikimedia
domains, and no longer be publicly usable. Accordingly, the WIKIMEDIA tile
provider has been removed. Use any of the other tile providers instead.

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``ScreenDistanceSpec`` and ``DataDistanceSpec`` are deprecated, and now return
a ``SizeSpec``. Custom extensions using these should use ``SizeSpec`` instead.

``PropertyUnitsSpec`` is deprecated. Use ``UnitsSpec`` instead (this is unlikely
to impact any typical usage).

``bokeh.core.query`` functions no longer accept callables and/or context in
queries. This feature added unnecessary complication and was not used inside
the Bokeh codebase (or ever demonstrated in docs or examples).

``Document.delete_modules`` was deprecated and will be removed in the future.
Use ``Document.models.destroy`` instead.

Units Properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Units properties must now be configured with an ``units_enum`` that is an
``enumeration`` instead of a ``units_type`` that is an ``Enum`` property:

.. code:: python

    units_enum=SpatialUnits # use this

    units_type=Enum(SpatialUnits) # NOT this

This is only of potential interest to custom extensions.

Raw string paths in ``Image`` property
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use ``pathlib.Path`` instead.

``gridplot(plot_width, plot_height)`` were deprecated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use ``width`` or ``height`` respectively instead.

``curstate().file`` is now a dataclass
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously it was a `dict`-based ad-hoc data structure. Replace key indexing
with attribute access.

``static init_ModelName(): void {}`` was deprecated
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use new TypeScript 4.4 static blocks ``static {}`` instead. Support for static
``init_`` methods will be removed in bokeh 3.0. This change only affects model
providing extensions.
