.. _release-3-0-0:

3.0.0
=====

Bokeh Version ``3.0.0`` () is a major milestone of Bokeh project.

* Official support for Python 3.7 was removed and for 3.10 added.
* Support added for favicon.ico files
* Initial import times reduced
* Support added for new selection policy NodesAndAdjacentNodes
* Plot.remove_tools() function added

.. _release-3-0-0-migration:

`Migration Guide`
-----------------

Additions
~~~~~~~~~

``Switch`` widget
.................

Provides a replacement for a checkbox input.

Removals
~~~~~~~~

``plot_width`` and ``plot_height``
..................................

These properties have been removed. Use standard ``width`` and ``height`` for
all layout-able models.

``AuthMixin``
.............

Class ``AuthMixin`` is replaced by ``AuthRequestHandler``, a sub-class of
``RequestHandler``.

``legend``
..........

The ``legend`` keyword argument to glyph methods has been removed. Use more
specific ``legend_label``, ``legend_group``, and ``legend_field`` instead.

``Oval``
........

The ``Oval``glyph is removed. Use ``Ellipse`` instead.

``GridSpec``
............

This model has been removed with no replacement.q

``names`` properties
....................

Some models could be configured with both a ``names`` property and a
``renderers`` property. In all cases, ``names`` has been removed. Use the
``renderers`` property to specify renderers.

``WidgetBox``
.............

The ``WidgetBox`` model and associated convenience function ``widgetbox`` have
been removed. Use row, column, and grid layouts instead.

Markers
.......

Individual scatter markers, e.g ``Square``, ``DiamondX`` have been removed,
along with their related glyph methods. Use ``Scatter`` and ``figure.scatter``
instead.

``bokeh.util.session_id``
.........................

This module has been removed. Use ``bokeh.util.token`` instead.

``WebSource``
.............

This model has been removed, use ``WebDataSource`` instead.

``from_networkx``
.................

The ``from_networkx`` function is now only available to import from
``bokeh.plotting``.

Distance Specs
..............

``ScreenDistanceSpec`` and ``DataDistanceSpec`` are removed. Use ``SizeSpec``
instead.

``EditTool.custom_icon`` was replaced with ``Tool.icon``
........................................................

Use ``Tool.icon`` property instead.

``render_mode``
...............

``render_mode`` was removed from all annotations. Annotations were cleanly
separated between those which render to canvas and those that use HTML and CSS.
The default is canvas rendering. Use the new ``HTMLTitle``, ``HTMLLabel`` and
``HTMLLabelSet`` models whenever previously ``css`` render mode was used. Note
that ``Span`` and ``BoxAnnotation`` don't have a HTML equivalent anymore.

``FuncTickFormatter``
.....................

``FuncTickFormatter`` has been renamed to ``CustomJSTickFormatter``.

``HasProps.__subtype__``
........................

Explicit sub-typing support was removed both from models and the protocol.
If you want to extend existing models without the need for providing an
implementation, then use data models (e.g. extend from ``DataModel``).

``CDSView.source``
..................

``CDSView`` now implicitly uses the source provided by a glyph renderer it
as assigned to. Previously providing a data source in both a glyph renderer
and a source view was redundant.

``RadioGroup / CheckboxGroup on_click``
.......................................

``RadioGroup`` and ``CheckboxGroup`` no longer supports ``on_click`` event handlers.
Use ``on_change('active', cb)`` instead.

Renames
~~~~~~~

* ``copy_to_clipboard`` icon was renamed to ``copy``

Runtime dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bokeh now requires the package ``xyzservices`` for managing tile
source metadata.

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``tile_providers`` module providing ``get_providers`` and ``Vendors`` is now deprecated.
Any tile specification (e.g. as string name) can be now passed directly to ``add_tile``
instead.

``on_click`` event handlers on button type widgets have been replaced with ``on_event``
using ``bokeh.events.ButtonClick`` ("button_click") as the event type.

API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~

``gridplot()`` now returns ``GridPlot`` models
..............................................

Previously ``gridplot()`` returned a combination of ``Row`` and ``Column`` layouts,
depending on the supplied arguments. Additionally, setting ``merge_tools`` now tells
grid plots to actually merge tools instead of hidding the toolbar. To hide a toolbar,
use ``toolbar_location=None``.

bokehjs changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``figure.xaxis``, etc.
......................

``xaxis``, ``yaxis``, ``axis``, ``xgrid``, ``ygrid`` and ``grid`` attributes of
``figure`` now return a model proxy object, which mimics the behavior of bokeh's
plotting API. Arrays of axes/grids can be obtained using new ``xaxes``, ``yaxes``,
``axes``, ``xgrids``, ``ygrids`` and ``grids`` attributes.

Property changes push to server
...............................

Previously all changes were pushed to server, even if no actual changes were made.
Now only effective changes are pushed, which now maches the internal behavior of
bokehjs.

Deserialization code was split-off from ``Document``
....................................................

Now the purpose of ``Document`` is to manage models and deal with high-level
serialization concerns. Low-level handling was split-off into ``Deserializer``
class.

``HasProps.constructor``
........................

The ``constructor`` of ``HasProps`` has now two clearly defined code paths,
one for deferred and the other immediate initialization. The former is triggered
with ``new HasProps({id})`` syntax (it doesn't allow providing initial values)
and the later with ``new HasProps(attrs)``, where ``attrs`` can not have an
``id`` field. As a side effect, duplicating model's identity is not permitted
by default anymore, though one can still use deferred initializtion for this.

``init_ModelName`` was removed
..............................

This static initializer was added automatically by bokehjs' build system and
extensions' compiler. This isn't needed anymore as TypeScript supports ES2022
static initialization blocks (``static {}``).

Protocol changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Serialization of numbers
........................

Outside of ndarrays, nan, +inf and -inf are now systematically serialized as
``{"type": "number", "value": "nan"}``, ``{"type": "number", "value": "+inf"}``
and ``{"type": "number", "value": "-inf"}`` respectively.

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``Minimum.initial`` and ``Maximum.initial``
...........................................

Thanks to added support for serialization of infinities, ``initial`` properties can
now have intrinsic default values (inifinity and minus infinity respectively) instead
of ``None`` / ``null``.

``gridplot()`` now returns ``GridPlot`` models
..............................................

See bokeh's API changes for details.
