.. _release-0-12-11:

0.12.11
=======

Bokeh Version ``0.12.11`` (Nov 2017) is an incremental update that adds a few
important features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights include:

* ``Step`` glyph for step lines added (:bokeh-issue:`3644`)

* Level-of-Detail works with linked plots (:bokeh-issue:`5937`)

* Bokeh applications in notebooks made simpler to create (:bokeh-issue:`6565`)

Many other small bugfixes and docs additions. For full details see the
:bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

.. _release-0-12-11-migration:

`Migration Guide <releases.html#release-0-12-11-migration>`__
-------------------------------------------------------------

BokehJS Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To help with the eventual migration to TypeScript, we have switched to the new
CoffeeScript compiler. This should be completely transparent to standard users
but custom extensions may need small changes in some specific cases, for example,
the "Ion Range Slider" required the following change:

.. code-block:: none

    -      onChange: @slide,
    -      onFinish: @slidestop
    +      onChange: (data) => @slide(data),
    +      onFinish: (data) => @slidestop(data),

Shorthand initialization syntax for `Range1d(start, end)` in bokehjs was
removed due to technical difficulties. Use full `new Range1d({start, end})`
syntax instead. The short syntax may be restored at some point as a part of
`bokeh-api` package.

The coordinate system of canvas layout and related infrastructure (positioning,
hit testing, etc.) is new "screen", where the origin is left-top corner of the
canvas. This change shouldn't affect users, however it affects custom model
developers. Follow updated examples for new development patterns.

.. _project roadmap: https://bokeh.org/roadmap
