.. _release-0-12-4:

0.12.4
======

Bokeh Version ``0.12.4`` (Jan 2017) is an incremental update that adds a few
important features and fixes several bugs. Some of the highlights include:

* Efficient binary array protocol. (:bokeh-issue:`2204`)
* A general mechanism to add ``CustomJS`` callbacks to any property. (:bokeh-issue:`5498`)
* Several fixes to log plots. (:bokeh-issue:`2789`, :bokeh-issue:`3834`, :bokeh-issue:`5389`, :bokeh-issue:`5549`, :bokeh-issue:`5576`)
* Fixes related to custom extensions. (:bokeh-issue:`5315`, :bokeh-issue:`5590`)
* Guidance and examples for embedding a Bokeh server directly in standalone scripts, Jupyter notebooks, and Tornado and Flask applications.
* Support for read-only (client-side) properties, e.g. plot inner dimensions (:bokeh-issue:`5199`)
* Improved documentation for the :ref:`bokeh.palettes` module. (:bokeh-issue:`5619`)
* Major refactor of ``bokeh.core`` including expanded documentation and tests (:bokeh-issue:`5626`, :bokeh-issue:`5627`)

Many other small bugfixes and docs additions. For full details see the :bokeh-tree:`CHANGELOG`.

.. _release-0-12-4-migration:

`Migration Guide <releases.html#release-0-12-4-migration>`__
------------------------------------------------------------

As the project approaches a 1.0 release, it is necessary to make some changes
to bring interfaces and functionality up to a point that can be maintained
long-term. We try to limit such changes as much as possible, and have a
period of deprecation.

Broken Dialog Removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``Dialog`` widget has been broken for some time. Due to lack of user
reports about it, and because custom extensions now provide a path for users
to integrate third party JS dialog libraries, this widget has been removed
immediately.

Custom Extension Import/Export
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BokehJS is making a slow migration to TypeScript to support long-term stability
and maintainability.
This necessitates some short term changes for writing custom extensions.

JavaScript extension code with ``requires`` and ``module.exports``, such as:

.. code-block:: python

    Model = require "model"

    class DateGapTickFormatter extends TickFormatter
        # implementation here

    module.exports =
        Model: DateGapTickFormatter

should be re-written as:

.. code-block:: python

    import {Model} from "model"

    export class DateGapTickFormatter extends TickFormatter
        # implementation here

Legend Locations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To improve consistency, the following locations names have changed:

================= =================
old location name new location name
================= =================
``left_center``   ``center_left``
``right_center``  ``center_right``
================= =================

The old location names will continue to work for some time with a
deprecation warning.

App Current Directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Directory style apps no longer ``chdir`` into the app directory. The module
attribute ``__file__`` should be used to construct any file paths relative
to ``main.py`` for use with ``open``, etc.

Window Titles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bokeh apps embedded with ``autoload_server`` will no longer set the browser
window title.

Positional Argument Order For ``hbar``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to provide much improved interactive help (true function signatures
and rich auto-generated docstrings) the order of the ``left`` and ``right``
parameters to ``hbar`` had to be swapped (cannot have non-default args after
a default arg). The new function signature is:

.. code-block:: python

    p.hbar(y, height, right, left=0, **kwargs)

Old ``bokeh-server`` Command Removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since 0.11, the old ``bokeh-server`` command remained and only printed a
message directing to information about using ``bokeh serve``. It has been
removed completely.

Cruft ``auto`` Functions removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following functions in ``bokeh.io`` were long unused and have been
removed: ``autoadd``, ``autopush``, and ``autosave``.

Eco Templates No Longer Supported
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BokehJS has migrated to using ``.tsx`` templates. Provisional support for
including ``.eco`` templates has been removed from both BokehJS and the
Bokeh Python library.

Base64 serialisation and Python 3.3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The addition a binary protocol that uses a base 64 encoding for NumPy arrays
means that Bokeh will *not* function with NumPy arrays on Python 3.3, due to a
bug in Python. A possible workaround is to convert all arrays to plain python
lists. As a reminder, Bokeh official support includes Python 2.7 and 3.4+ only.

BokehJS BackboneView ``$`` Removed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In part of a longer effort to remove the JQuery dependency from BokehJS
entirely, the ``$`` attribute that BokehJS added to ``BackboneView``
has been removed. Use e.g., ``@$el.find`` instead.

Additionally, use of ``Bokeh.$`` and ``Bokeh._``

Refactor of ``bokeh.core``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is expected that all of these these changes should be below the level
that standard users will ever be exposed to. These changes are listed here
for completeness.

The overly large ``bokeh.core.properties`` module has been split up. This
improves maintainability and allows the contents of ``bokeh.core.properties``
to limited to things of that might be useful to users writing custom models.
The new file structure:

* ``bokeh.core.has_props``
* ``bokeh.core.properties``
* ``bokeh.core.property.bases``
* ``bokeh.core.property.containers``
* ``bokeh.core.property.descriptors``
* ``bokeh.core.property.descriptor_factory``
* ``bokeh.core.property.override``

The following class names have been changed to improve intent and clarity
(i.e. only things that are actually Python descriptors are named "Descriptor"):

=================================== ===============================
old class name                      new class name
=================================== ===============================
``PropertyFactory``                 ``PropertyDescriptorFactory``
``PropertyDescriptor``              ``Property``
``ParameterizedPropertyDescriptor`` ``ParameterizedProperty``
``BasicProperty``                   ``BasicPropertyDescriptor``
``DataSpecProperty``                ``DataSpecPropertyDescriptor``
``UnitsSpecProperty``               ``UnitsSpecPropertyDescriptor``
=================================== ===============================

The following unused and non-useful properties were removed in this effort:
``Align``, ``Event``, ``Function``, and ``This``.

The default value for the ``owner`` parameter of the ``__get__`` method
on property descriptors was an unnecessary change to the standard Python
descriptor protocol, and has been removed.

Additionally, the ``HasProps.set`` method has been removed. The name caused
problems with the Sphinx docs build, and it was an unnecessary duplicate of
``HasProps.update`` (which should be used instead).

.. _project roadmap: https://bokeh.org/roadmap
